Hi, I'm Vicki Murley,
the Safari Technologies Evangelist
at Apple.
The number of users browsing the web
with Safari on iOS is growing every day.
In this video,
I'm going to give you an overview of
the available technologies which you
can use to deliver an awesome experience
to iOS users visiting your website.
Since this is an overview,
I won't be going into all the details
of every available technology,
but along the way I'll
point you to additional,
in-depth resources so that
you can get more information
on each technology as needed.
So let's get started.
[Transcript missing]
In fact, WebKit is used as the layout
engine in Safari on Mac OS X,
Windows, and iOS.
Besides being blazingly fast and
providing a small memory footprint,
which is great for mobile devices,
another one of WebKit's strengths is
that it has great support for HTML5.
So HTML5 is the technology that
you can use to deliver rich web
experiences in Safari on all platforms,
including iOS.
These days, the phrase "HTML5" has
kind of a dual meaning.
First of all,
the term "HTML5" refers to a
formal specification from the W3C.
This is a specification that's
used by web browser implementers
to determine how different tags
and technologies should behave.
There are a lot of technologies
in the HTML5 specification that
are supported by Safari on iOS,
including web sockets, geolocation,
enclosed captions,
and full screen mode for video.
So that's kind of the first
meaning of the term HTML5,
referring to that W3C specification.
Lately,
the term HTML5 is also being used as
sort of a buzzword or catchphrase to
refer to a collection of technologies
that web developers can use to
deliver rich internet applications
and rich web page experiences.
In that collection, we of course have the
HTML5 specification.
We also have CSS3 for adding
advanced styling and animation.
And finally, we have JavaScript to
tie it all together.
JavaScript is our interface to
many of the elements in the HTML5.
We can use it to change CSS styles,
and it gives us some additional
features such as touch and
gesture detection in web pages.
I'm going to touch on each of these and
how you can use them in Safari on iOS,
but let me start with HTML5.
The HTML5 specification is very large,
so today I'm just going to touch
on two key features of this spec:
audio and video elements
and offline data storage.
Let's get started talking about
the HTML5 audio and video elements.
These are standard HTML elements that
you can use to embed media in web pages.
Why should you use HTML to embed
audio and video in web pages?
First of all,
these elements are the best way to
deliver media in web pages on iOS.
If you want to display video or play
audio in your website in Safari on iOS,
this is the way to do it.
Secondly,
HTML is also a great way to deliver
media because of built-in optimizations.
For example, since Safari is responsible
for playing the media,
and we've created Safari,
we can optimize video playback
by decoding it in hardware
to extend battery life,
which is great for users.
The HTML5 media elements in
Safari also include default controls
that are customized to each platform.
So you can see here on the desktop,
we have default controls that appear
when a user hovers over the video.
They're pretty small,
so that users can see
plenty of the video,
but they're still big enough to
be clickable with a mouse pointer.
On iPad, the default built-in controls
are slightly bigger so that
they're tappable with a finger.
Finally, you should use HTML5 audio
and video elements because
they're standard web technology.
There's no new programming
languages to learn,
and they behave just like other
web page elements in the sense
that they can be styled with
CSS and controlled with JavaScript.
So when you combine HTML5 audio and
video elements with CSS and JavaScript,
what specifically is possible?
Well, here are some of the
things that you can do.
First of all,
you can create your own custom
controls that match the look
and feel of your web page.
There's a JavaScript API that
accompanies these elements,
which you can use to play, pause,
and query the state of your media.
This includes JavaScript to
trigger full screen mode.
You can also use standard DOM events
to optimize the experience.
Events are emitted when an error is
detected and as progress is made,
so you can do things like put up an
error message or display a progress
indicator to really optimize
and provide feedback to users.
And finally, as I mentioned,
these elements behave just
like other web page elements,
so you can style them with CSS.
You can easily add a drop
shadow to your video,
change the opacity,
add a reflection to your video,
mask the video with an image.
And with a lot of the CSS transforms
that are available in CSS3,
you could slide the
video across the screen,
scale it to different sizes, tilt it,
and even flip it around in 3D space.
space.
Another great reason to use
HTML5 media elements is that
it's easy to get started.
I'm going to talk more
about HTML5 video later on,
but right now I'd like to show
you how easy it is to get started.
Here,
with just a few simple lines of code,
we've embedded video in a web page.
We have an opening tag,
which specifies the width and height.
We've added the controls attribute,
which tells Safari that we'd like to
use the default built-in controls.
And we have a source attribute
that's pointing to our media.
Between the opening and closing
tags is our fallback content.
This is the content that's
displayed in browsers that don't
implement the HTML5 video tag.
In this case,
our fallback content is a line of text,
but it could really be anything: text,
an image, even plugin content.
So this is looking pretty good.
We have some video
displaying in our web page,
but the video on our page,
the screen is black.
That's because what we're seeing here
is the very first frame of the video.
And in this case,
the first frame of this video is dark.
The video content fades
in after a second or so.
So even though we have our
video showing in our web page,
we want this default
appearance to change slightly.
To do that,
we can add a poster attribute.
So here we've added the poster attribute,
and we're just pointing to an image file.
And that displays this image instead
of the first frame of the video.
From here,
we can add some CSS styling to our video.
With just one line of CSS,
we can add a drop shadow to our video.
So now it's looking even better.
We can also use just a little bit of
JavaScript to add a customized button.
So here in my HTML,
I've added an additional element,
my play/pause button.
And I'm specifying that when the user
lifts their finger from the screen,
we should toggle the state
of this play/pause button.
In this toggle play/pause function,
we're just doing a couple simple things.
We're grabbing the video with
the query selector function,
and assigning it to a variable.
And we're also grabbing that
button so that we can change
the look and feel of it.
Next, we're just checking the state of
the video to see if it's paused,
and if it is, we're calling the play
function on that video.
We're also changing the class name on
our button to change the look and feel.
And then if the video isn't paused,
then we're calling the pause
function on that video,
and again,
changing the look and feel of the button.
And the result is going to
look something like this.
As you can see, we tap on the play button
to begin playing the video,
hit it again to pause the video,
and as we tap to play and pause,
the video responds accordingly.
So now let's move on to another key
part of the HTML5 specification:
offline storage.
So when I talk about
HTML5 offline storage,
I'm referring to a collection of
technologies that you can use to
create web applications that will
work even when users don't have
an active internet connection.
So why should you add offline storage
capabilities to your web application?
Well, the first and most obvious reason
is that users will always be
able to access your web app.
Secondly, if you add this functionality,
your web app will have
improved performance.
If you're loading resources locally
instead of over the network,
your web application will load faster,
and if you're loading data
from a local data storage,
your user interface
will be more responsive.
There are a lot of
flexible options available.
There's key-value pair storage
for simple string storage.
And for structured data,
there's a queryable
SQL database storage API.
Also, it's simple to get started.
So let me show you what you can do with
the HTML5 Offline Application Cache.
This technology lets you store
resources for your web application
locally on the user's device.
So all the HTML, CSS,
and JavaScript files, all of your images,
all of those can be stored locally
right on your user's iPhone,
iPod Touch, or iPad.
Your web app is going
to always be accessible.
Once a user visits it once,
the resources are downloaded,
and from that point forward,
users can always access your web app
just by revisiting that URL in Safari.
So the first thing we're going
to do is set the manifest
attribute on the HTML tag to
point to this simple text file.
I've named it my-offline-cache.app-cache.
Thank you.
So this file, my-offline-cache.appcache,
is going to look something like this.
It begins, the first line of this
file is cache manifest,
that's mandatory.
Lines in this file that begin
with a hash mark are comments,
and those are ignored.
And from there,
you really just list the URLs of
the resources that are required
by your web application.
So you can use absolute URLs,
or URLs that are relative
to the current page.
You can also use headers to
define an online whitelist.
So here, we're saying that we always
want this forecast.cgi file to
be fetched from the network,
never the cache.
And you can also use these
headers to switch from the
network back to the cache,
like so.
We always want this rainy.png
image to be fetched from the cache.
So once you have created
your manifest file,
you need to make one more change,
and that is to serve the manifest
file from your server with a
text cache manifest mime type.
If you have used an offline application
cache before on earlier versions of iOS,
you should know that the cache size has
increased to 50 megabytes in iOS 4.2,
making this feature even
more usable for more people.
So now you've got all of the
resources for your web application,
all the HTML, CSS, and JavaScript files,
all of your images.
All of that is now cached
locally on the user's device.
So what about the data that is
generated by your web application?
People entering their username,
saving the state of a game, etc.
Well, for storing dynamic data,
there's two types of storage.
The first is the Web Storage API.
This is used for simple key-value
pair storage for strings.
There's two types of web storage.
There's session storage,
which is something that could
replace cookies for session tracking,
and there's one session
per browser window or tab.
The second type of web
storage is local storage.
This is persistent, it's written to disk,
and it's global to the domain.
So storing items in web storage
is really straightforward.
It's just standard JavaScript.
So you can store an item in web
storage by calling a function.
Here we're setting the item with
the key of screen name and the
value "Vicki Murley." You can index
into an array or set a property
to set items in web storage.
Retrieving items from web
storage is also really simple.
Again, you can call a function.
Here we're calling getItem to get our
item that has the key screen name.
You can index into an
array or access a property.
So here we're setting and retrieving
items from session storage,
but the API for local
storage is exactly the same.
So that's a type of storage
that you can use for storing
simple strings of dynamic data.
If you want to store structured data,
you can use SQL database storage.
This API allows you to
execute SQL transactions
directly from JavaScript.
So you can query and manipulate
the data in your web application,
or do things like add search
to your web application.
You start by calling the Open Database
function with four parameters.
The first is required,
last three are optional.
The first parameter is
the name of our database.
In this case,
we have a to-do list example,
so the name of our database is "to-do".
That's followed by a version number,
a display string, and a size in bytes.
From here,
we can execute SQL transactions.
We start by just building
up a string of SQL,
and then we pass that to
the execute SQL function,
and our SQL is executed.
So we've learned about a few different
technologies that you can use to
create offline web applications.
What's possible when you
combine these technologies?
Well,
we have a few examples available at the
developer.apple.com Safari demos website.
The first is this offline calendar.
It uses an SQL database to store
all of the events in the calendar,
which allows us to
create a filtered search,
which searches through all of
the events in the calendar,
and returns matching events as
the user types new characters
into the search field.
This calendar also uses an
HTML5 offline application cache,
so that it can be used to create a
search engine for the application.
This allows us to create a search
engine for the application,
so that it's fully functional
even if a user doesn't have an
active connection to the internet.
We also have a simple checkers
application that demonstrates
offline storage capabilities.
This demo uses web storage,
so simple key-value pairs of
strings to store the state
of the game and high scores.
It also uses an HTML5
offline application cache,
so that it's fully functional
without an active network connection.
This application feels even more
like a native application because
it uses a home screen icon,
and it also runs in full screen mode when
it's launched from that home screen icon.
So if you want to add offline storage
capabilities to your web application,
what tools are available to you to use?
Well, as I mentioned,
WebKit is the basis of
Safari on all platforms.
So you can actually
use the Web Inspector,
which is available in
Safari on Mac OS X and Windows,
to add offline functionality to
your web application for iOS.
It has some really great features.
You can inspect all of the
values for local storage.
And if you click on the
name of a local database,
you can even execute
SQL transactions interactively.
So that's it for HTML5.
Now let's move on to talking about CSS,
primarily CSS effects.
So when I say CSS effects,
I'm referring to a family of
CSS properties that you can use to
create engaging user interfaces and
add visual styling and animation.
So why use CSS?
Well, CSS will let you deliver rich
animated interfaces on iOS.
It's also simple to use.
It's just standard web technology,
so if you've ever written CSS,
you know how to use CSS effects.
Graceful degradation is built right in.
A web browser will simply ignore any
CSS property that it doesn't understand.
So you can add an animation and create
an enhanced interface in Safari that will
still be functional in other browsers.
Finally,
Performance Many of the CSS animations in
Safari on iOS are hardware-accelerated.
So even though JavaScript is
really fast in Safari on iOS,
a hardware-accelerated animation
will always perform better.
So this is why CSS is so great.
What can you do with CSS?
Well, you can translate, rotate, scale,
or skew any web page element
in 2D or even 3D space.
You can animate state changes that
would otherwise be instantaneous,
and we'll see an example
of that in a moment.
You can create advanced effects and rich
animations with just a few lines of code.
And you can embed custom
fonts in web pages.
Prior to iOS 4.2, only SVG fonts were
supported as custom fonts.
But in iOS 4.2 and later,
TrueType fonts and OpenType
fonts are also supported.
So speaking of fonts,
let's take a look at a text example.
So here we have a line of text,
"Hello World," with some CSS properties
that you've probably seen before,
that you're used to seeing.
We have a color, a font family,
and a font size.
This text looks pretty good,
but we can take this text a step further
by adding a text stroke around the text.
We do that by adding the text stroke
property with a value of two pixels,
and we want our stroke color to be white.
This looks pretty cool,
but we can make it even better by
using a custom font for this text.
To do that,
I use the font at font face rule.
I specify the name of my custom font.
In this case,
I'm naming it after the type
of font that I found online.
It's called "lobster," and I point the
source value to the URL of my font file.
I also change my font family
CSS property to use my custom font
as the first font in the list.
So this text is looking pretty cool,
but we can take it even another
step further by making the
red color a red gradient.
To do that,
we're going to add a background image
to this element using a WebKit gradient.
This is a linear gradient that
starts in the upper left-hand corner,
and goes down to the
lower left-hand corner,
and the color interpolates
from white to our red color.
So here you can see we have the
gradient that's showing up kind
of behind our text at the moment,
but we want that gradient
to be on the text.
So what we do,
we set the color of this text
to transparent so that the
gradient can show through,
and then we clip the background to
the text using the background clip
property with the value of text.
So this text looks pretty good.
Now let's say that we want to make
this element appear on screen.
So one way that we could do this
is by setting the opacity value,
changing it from 0 to 1
to make this text appear.
So if we do that,
change the value of the opacity
property in JavaScript from 0 to 1,
our text is just going
to pop onto the screen.
But maybe what we want instead
is for our text to kind of
fade onto the screen gradually,
over time.
To do that, it's very easy to add
this animation using CSS.
Here we have our Hello class,
which is a class on our text,
and we're adding three CSS properties.
The transition property,
which tells Safari which
CSS property we want to animate,
that's the opacity property.
The transition duration property,
we want this animation
to last three seconds.
Finally, a transition timing function.
There are several
built-in timing functions:
easeIn, easeOut, easeInOut, and linear.
Here we're specifying a
timing function of easeIn.
[Transcript missing]
Well, the answer is no.
The rule is actually that it's sort of
one touch per container is required to
start playback within that container.
This means that calling play
from an onload handler will
not start media playback.
This also means that autoplay
does not work in Safari on iOS.
However, after a user starts playback,
subsequent calls to the play function
will work for that container.
So what does this mean if I want
to play two videos back to back,
one after another?
What steps will I follow?
Well, the first thing you're going to
do is add an event listener on
your video for the ended event.
Once that event is emitted,
you should reset the source
attribute for that video element
to your second media source.
Once that's done,
you can call the play function
on that video element to start
playing the second media file.
And of course, you should remove the
ended event listener.
So what does this mean if I want
to play two videos back to back,
one after another?
What steps will I follow?
Well, the first thing you're going to
do is add an event listener on
your video for the ended event.
Once that event is emitted,
you should reset the source
attribute for that video element
to your second media source.
Once that's done,
you can call the play function
on that video element to start
playing the second media file.
And of course,
you should remove the ended event
listener from the video so that you don't
repeat the process all over again when
your second media file finishes playing.
For bonus points, you should also display
progress as this is happening.
You can show a progress indicator
until you receive a can play
or can play through event.
And you should always listen
for the error event to report
problems to your users.
For more information on
HTML5 audio and video,
again, I would encourage you to visit the
Safari Dev Center at developer.apple.com.
Two key pieces of documentation are the
Safari HTML5 audio and video guide and
the HTML media element class reference.
And also,
there are several pieces of sample
code that will be helpful to you when
you're implementing this technology.
So that's it for some additional
information on HTML5 video.
Let's move on to talk about
what's new in Safari on iOS.
So this new feature is
extremely straightforward.
Basically,
you're just going to invoke the printing
dialog by calling the print function.
Doing so will bring up a
platform-specific UI specific
to either iPhone or iPad.
On iPhone,
a panel slides up so that users
can choose their printer options.
And on iPad, a popover appears aligned
to the action button.
Very straightforward.
Just call the print function to
automatically invoke AirPrint.
Adding support for AirPlay on
HTML5 video is also very simple.
All you have to do is set
the AirPlay attribute on
your HTML5 video to allow.
So you can see that I'm calling
it the AirPlay attribute,
but then in my code snippet,
you see xWebKitAirPlay = allow.
You may be wondering what that
prefix xWebKit actually means.
This is following the W3C recommended
syntax for a vendor-specific,
HTML attribute.
So in this case, we have the X,
the vendor is WebKit,
and the feature is AirPlay.
If you want to know more
about this recommended syntax,
you can visit this URL.
Support for AirPlay is
really easy to add,
and it can be enabled in
the default video controls.
So now let's move on to talking
about accelerometer and gyroscope.
What can you use them for?
Well, one thing that you can use
them for is playing games.
You might imagine having a boxing
game where you could tilt the phone
right and left to throw punches,
and maybe move the phone to
the side to avoid a punch.
You can also use the accelerometer and
gyroscope to view a panoramic photo.
There's this great native application
on iOS called 360 Panorama,
and it allows you to create a
panoramic photo and then view
that photo from within a web page.
So as you stand holding the phone and
turn your body to the right and left,
you can view this entire panoramic scene.
The accelerometer and gyroscope can
also be used for interacting with data.
So here we have a chart of
age structure in Germany.
And as I tilt the iPad away from me,
the years go up and the data on the graph
and in the chart adjusts accordingly.
As I tilt the iPad towards me,
the years go down, and again,
the chart and the graph adjust.
So how do I begin accessing
accelerometer and gyroscope data
in my web page in Safari on iOS?
Well, this follows the W3C device
orientation specification.
And this information is exposed
through two types of DOM events.
[Transcript missing]
Alpha is the rotation around gravity.
Beta is the tilt forwards and backwards.
And Gamma is the tilt left and right.
Let's take a closer look at
these orientation values.
So if I have an iPhone
laying flat on a table,
the X-axis is going to go
directly across the phone,
Y-axis goes up and down,
and the Z-axis goes
straight through the phone,
pointing up.
That means for the alpha value,
that's degrees rotated around the z-axis.
So this is going to report
movement such as this.
An iPhone kind of spinning
around like a compass.
The beta value reports the
degrees rotated around the x-axis.
So if we're looking at
an iPhone from the side,
the x-axis is now pointing towards you.
So the beta value
describes motion like this.
The gamma value is degrees
rotated around the y-axis,
so if we're looking down at an iPhone
from the top or directly from the bottom,
the gamma value is going
to report motion like this.
So that's device orientation.
What about device motion?
How is the device moving?
Well, to get device motion information,
again, it's pretty straightforward.
You're going to add an
EventListener to the window object.
And then once that event is emitted,
you can check one of three
vectors on the event for motion.
Acceleration describes the acceleration
force applied to the device with X,
Y, and Z properties.
Acceleration including
gravity is like acceleration,
but with the Earth's gravity included.
And rotation rate describes
the angular velocity around the
vectors described with alpha,
beta, and gamma properties.
Acceleration is measured in units of g,
which is units of Earth's gravity.
So a body at rest has
0 g in the x direction,
0 g in the y direction,
and 1 g in the z direction, up and down.
So any deviation from an X, Y,
Z value of 0, 0,
1 means that the device is moving.
When you're listening for
the device motion event,
you should know that the accelerometer
will emit several events per second.
So you're going to have to filter
this data for best results.
The best way to do this is to use a
combination of high-pass and low-pass
filters to create an average value
of a range of events over time.
So remember,
if you're trying to decide whether to
use the accelerometer or gyroscope,
remember that you should listen for
the device orientation event to use
the gyroscope wherever possible.
The gyroscope is available on
iPhone 4 and the latest iPod Touch.
Listen for the device motion event to
use the accelerometer whenever necessary.
This is appropriate for older
iPhones and older iPod Touch models,
and also for iPad.
So how do you detect whether or
not the gyroscope is available?
Well, the gyroscope is available if
acceleration and rotation rate on
your device motion event are not null.
Acceleration, including gravity,
on the device motion event is
guaranteed to work on all devices.
For more information on the
accelerometer and gyroscope,
visit the Safari Dev Center,
in particular the Device Orientation
Event Class Reference and the
Device Motion Event Class Reference.
So that covers new
features in Safari on iOS.
So that's it!
I've covered an overview of the
available technologies in Safari on iOS,
provided more information on HTML5 video,
and introduced new technologies which
you can use to add additional features
to your web application or website.
With this information,
you're ready to enhance and optimize your
web content and deliver the best possible
experience to Safari on iOS users.